Professionalism:
Medical Ethics and Laws

Laws related to the Practice of Physical Therapy

Objectives
 Delineate the difference between medical law and medical ethics.
  List six biomedical ethical principles and their roles in health care.
  Discuss patient confidentiality.
  Describe the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996.
  Discuss the patient’s bill of rights.
  List the elements of informed consent.
  Explain the guide for professional conduct that physical therapists are morally bound to follow.
  Explain the guide for conduct of the affiliate member that physical therapist assistants are morally bound to follow.
  Discuss the eight value-based behaviors for the physical therapist assistant.

Medical Ethics
  Fundamental Principles by which people judge behavior or conduct
  Help individuals make decisions and serve as criteria against which people gauge the rightness or wrongness of behavior.
  Medical Laws
  Rules made by authority with the power to enforce them
  Laws flow from ethical principles.
  Limited to specific situations
  Have detailed language
  Biomedical Ethical Principles Terminology
  
  Beneficence
  Nonmaleficence
  Justice and Veracity
  Confidentiality
  Autonomy/Patient’s Rights
  
BENEFICENCE
The state or quality of being kind,  charitable, or beneficial. 
It is a continuum, from a neutral not harming, to a positive doing good
 At a minimum it means maintaining professional competence.
Examples:
Attend to needs of patients
Timely, appropriate interventions to advance the treatment plan
Evaluate the effectiveness of an intervention
Communicate treatment results to healthcare 
Achieve and maintain professional competence

NONMALEFICIENCE
Do not perform treatments you are not comfortable with which could potentially harm a patient
Be aware of precautions and contra-indications before performing a treatment
Hippocratic Oath

Justice and Veracity
Justice: implies fairness and equality and requires impartial treatment of clients.
Use equal diligence for all
Attend to the needs of clients, no matter how difficult their personality, disability, race, religion, gender, age, or lifestyle.
Communicate information about treatment without bias
Deal fairly and equally with professional supervisors.
	
Veracity: Truthfulness in word and deed
Provide factual, scientifically based, and relevant information to patients.
Accurately report and record critical data, regardless of personal consequences.
Place the welfare of clients above personal or professional gain.
Charge reasonable fees, and then only for services actually performed

Confidentiality
Hold in confidence personal information of clients, only divulging it when they or their legal guardian has given permission.
This is not just an ethical rule but now bound by a Federal law
HIPPA: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
PHI- protected health info
Example of safe-guards:
           Do not use name,
             Speak quietly
              Lock files
               Additional passwords

Autonomy and Patients’ Rights
Right of self-determination, independence and freedom.
 It is the personal right to absorb information, comprehend it, make a choice, and carry out that choice

Patient rights/patient welfare-     
Patient Bill of Rights 

* Confidentiality
* Informed consent
* Sexual misconduct of providers
* Discrimination against patients
* Utilization of human subjects for research

Elements of Informed Consent     

Inform clients about available options regarding their treatment. 
Make sure they understand the actions and risks of treatment options.
Respect and accept patient decisions about  care or the care of another person for whom they are legally responsible.
Presumed or implied consent:
Used in emergency situations- beneficence

Ethics Documents for 
Physical Therapist Assistants

Standards of Ethical Conduct for the Physical Therapist Assistant (PTA)
APTA Standards of Ethical Conduct: 

Ethics Documents for 
Physical Therapist Assistants

• Altruism
• Caring and Compassion
• Continuing Competence
• Duty
• Integrity
• PT/PTA collaboration
• Responsibility
• Social Responsibility

Types of Ethical Problems in PT
1. Patient rights/patient welfare concerns
2. Professional issues
3. Business/economic issues





